Ilariae/delegated guardians (#812)
wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs: docs/protocol/security.md

## Core Security Assumptions

At its core, Wormhole is secured by a network of [Guardian](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/guardians/){target=\_blank} nodes that validate and sign messages. If a supermajority (e.g., 13 out of 19) of Guardians sign the same message, it can be considered valid. A smart contract on the target chain will verify the signatures and format of the message before approving any transaction.

- Wormhole's core security primitive is its signed messages (signed [VAAs](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/vaas/){target=\_blank}).
- The Guardian network is currently secured by a collection of 19 of the world's top [validator companies](https://wormhole-foundation.github.io/wormhole-dashboard/#/?endpoint=Mainnet){target=\_blank}.
- Guardians produce signed state attestations (signed VAAs) when valid on-chain events are observed and verified according to Wormhole's security rules.

> - For full Guardian Set chains, all Guardians run full nodes rather than light clients. For chains configured for delegated observation, a delegated subset of Guardians runs full nodes and broadcasts signed observations to the rest of the network. Canonical Guardians wait for a delegated quorum before signing.

Reviewer: Focus nit: Prefer "delegated chain" over "chains configured for delegated observation" and [naming convention](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs/pull/812/changes#r2842052376):
```suggestion
- For full Guardian Set chains, all Guardians run full nodes rather than light clients. For delegated chains, a delegated subset of Guardians runs full nodes and broadcasts signed delegate observations to the rest of the network. Canonical Guardians wait for a delegate quorum before signing.
```

- Any Signed VAA can be verified as authentic by the Core Contract of any other chain.
- The [Executor](/docs/protocol/infrastructure/relayers/executor-framework/){target=\_blank} is considered untrusted in the Wormhole ecosystem. It can affect message availability (timing of delivery) but cannot alter or forge VAAs, as validity is enforced by Guardian signatures.

In summary:

- **Core integrators are not exposed to risk from chains and contracts they do not integrate with**.
- By default, you only trust Wormhole's signing process and the core contracts of the chains you're on.
- You can expand your contract and chain dependencies as you see fit.

Core assumptions aside, many other factors impact the real-world security of decentralized platforms. Here is more information on additional measures that have been put in place to ensure the security of Wormhole.

## Guardian Network

> Wormhole is an evolving platform. While the canonical Guardian set consists of 19 members, not all chains require all 19 Guardians to perform direct on-chain observation. For certain chains configured for delegated observation, a delegated subset of Guardians performs direct on-chain observation while the final VAA signature threshold remains 13-of-19.

Reviewer: Focus nit: Prefer "delegated chain" over "chains configured for delegated observation" and [naming convention](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs/pull/812/changes#r2842052376):
```suggestion
Wormhole is an evolving platform. While the canonical Guardian set consists of 19 members, not all chains require all 19 Guardians to perform direct on-chain observation. For delegated chains, a delegated subset of Guardians performs direct on-chain observation while the final VAA signature threshold remains 13-of-19.
```

> Delegated observation introduces a per-chain trust assumption: the delegated quorum threshold determines how many Delegated Guardians must independently agree before Canonical Guardians sign. This model does not weaken the final 13-of-19 VAA requirement, but it means the observation layer for that chain depends on fewer nodes. The `WormholeDelegatedGuardians` governance contract allows these thresholds to be adjusted as network requirements evolve.

Reviewer: Focus nit: Prefer "Guardian Sets" over "delegated observation" and [naming convention](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs/pull/812/changes#r2842052376):
```suggestion
Delegated Guardian Sets introduces a per-chain trust assumption: the delegate quorum threshold determines how many Delegated Guardians must independently agree before Canonical Guardians sign. This model does not weaken the final 13-of-19 VAA requirement, but it means the observation layer for that chain depends on fewer nodes. The `WormholeDelegatedGuardians` governance contract allows these thresholds to be adjusted as network requirements evolve.
```

- Change the current Guardian set.
- Expand the Guardian set.
- Upgrade ecosystem contract implementations.
- Configure per-chain Delegated Guardian sets and security thresholds via the `WormholeDelegatedGuardians` contract.

The governance system is fully open source in the core repository. See the [Open Source section](#open-source){target=\_blank} for contract source.

## Monitoring

A key element of Wormhole's defense-in-depth strategy is that each Guardian is a highly competent validator company with its own in-house processes for running, monitoring, and securing blockchain operations. This heterogeneous approach to monitoring increases the likelihood that fraudulent activity is detected and reduces the number of single failure points in the system.

> For full Guardian Set chains, all Guardians run full nodes and independently monitor block production and contract activity. For chains configured for delegated observation, Delegated Guardians perform direct on-chain monitoring while Canonical Guardians monitor delegated observations and enforce quorum safeguards.

Reviewer: Focus nit: Prefer "delegated chain" over "chains configured for delegated observation" and [naming convention](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs/pull/812/changes#r2842052376):
```suggestion
For full Guardian Set chains, all Guardians run full nodes and independently monitor block production and contract activity. For delegated chains, Delegated Guardians perform direct on-chain monitoring while Canonical Guardians monitor delegate observations and enforce quorum safeguards.
```

## Asset Layer Protections

One key strength of the Wormhole ecosystem is the Guardians' ability to validate and protect the integrity of assets across multiple blockchains.

To enforce the Wormhole Asset Layer's core protections, the Global Accountant tracks the total circulating supply of all Wormhole assets across all chains, preventing any blockchain from bridging assets that could violate the supply invariant.

> For chains configured for delegated observation, delegated quorum must be reached before Canonical Guardians contribute signatures, ensuring that per-chain delegated thresholds are respected without altering the Global Accountant's 13-of-19 security model.

Reviewer: Focus nit: Prefer "delegated chain" over "chains configured for delegated observation" and [naming convention](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs/pull/812/changes#r2842052376):
```suggestion
For delegated chains, delegate quorum must be reached before Canonical Guardians contribute signatures, ensuring that per-chain delegate thresholds are respected without altering the Global Accountant's 13-of-19 security model.
```
